Hello again!
In this video, we are going to talk about the async function.
The async function is another way to
start a thread.
It is defined in the  standard library header.
And we can start a thread by calling async().
This async function call represents a higher level abstraction than the standard thread classs.
We can start a task with async() and run it in the background,
and that will allow us to do other work while
the task is running.
So, as the name suggests, it can be used for starting asynchronous tasks.
The syntax for calling async() is very similar to the constructor of the standard
thread.
We give the task function as the first argument and then we follow it with the arguments to
the task function.
Here is the async() equivalent of "Hello Thread".
We have our task function, which just prints out "hello".
In the main function we call async().
We pass the pointer to the hello function as its argument.
So that will be the task function.
And this will create a new thread which executes the hello function.
And there we are! "Hello, Async!"
One of the advantages of using async() compared to the standard thread is that we can get the return
value from a task function.
When we call async(), it returns a future.
And when we are ready to get the result, we call get() on that future,
and that will give us the return
value from the function.
And there are also wait(), wait_for() and wait_until() if we just want to know that the background test has
completed.
So, for example, if we want to make sure that the file has been saved,
then we could call
wait().
Here is an example, which is maybe not a very realistic one(!)
We're going to compute a Fibonacci number.
If you are not familiar with the Fibonacci sequence,
it is a sequence of numbers which starts with one
and two.
And then you get the next number by adding the two previous numbers, so the next number is one plus
two, which is three. The number after that is two plus three, which is five.
Then three plus five is eight.
Five plus eight is 13 and so on.
We are going to implement this by making a recursive call,
which will give us the two previous values,
and then when we get to n == one,
then that will stop and the recursive functions will return.
We are going to call this in a thread,
which is not really very sensible, but it is an example!
So we are going to call async().
We give the pointer to the function as the first argument,
and then 40 is the second argument.
So that will be passed when we call fibonacci().
And the return value from this is stored in a future.
And then we can call get() on this future,
and that will give us the return value from the Fibonacci
calculation.
So we have started the thread, which is executing fibonacci with the argument 40.
It is going through and
calling the lower values.
And 165580141, which I am sure you will all agree is the correct answer :)
I will leave you to check that for yourselves.
There are some options we can give to async() which will decide what happens,
whether a new thread is created
or the task is run in the same thread that calls async.
The C++ library provides a couple of flags for this.
The first one is std::launch_async.
This will cause a new thread to be created and that will call the task function,
and the task function
will be executed as soon as the thread starts up.
The other one is std::launch_deferred,
and in this case, the task will be run in the same thread.
In fact, it will not be executed until get() or wait() and company is called on the returned future and
at that point the task function is executed.
So that is lazy evaluation.
Again, we do not actually do the calculation until we need the results.
And you can set both the flags using an "or", a single bar |
And in that case, the implementation will decide whether it wants to start a new thread.
So it is possible
if there are a lot of threads already in use, it could run in the current thread, and that is the default
if you do not provide any option.
So to use these flags, we pass them as a first argument.
If we have async(launch_async) that
will cause the function to be run in a separate thread.
If we call async(launch_deferred) that will
cause the function to be run in the same thread.
And if we just call async(func), then the implementation will decide.
So let's look at how this affects the behaviour.
So we have got a thread function here.
We are going to
print out the ID of this thread so we can see which thread it is.
We are also printing out the ID of the main thread.
So we will be able to tell if the function is executing in a different thread.
We're going to use async to launch this and we are going to use the different options for launching it.
We are going to use the async one first.
And then we are going to get() at the end of the program to give
us the result.
So let's see what happens with the async launch policy.
So you see that the two threads have different IDs.
So this has caused a new thread to be started.
The function starts executing before we call get().
And then we finally have the answer, 42.
Let's try it now with the deferred option...
So you can see the two threads have the same ID.
So this is running the function in the same thread that called async().
You will also notice that the function does not start executing until we call get().
I have put some sleeps
in here to make sure that everything happens in the right order.
So get() is called first and then the function is executed.
So that is lazy evaluation again.
And finally, we are going to use the default so the system will choose that.
So the two threads have different IDs and the function is executed before we call get().
So that is the same as launch_async
and I think you will find that is usually the case.
Although you cannot rely on it.
Normally, you would think that a default value for something would be a sensible compromise.
The problem with the default value for async is that we do not know whether it is going to launch a new
thread or not, and this can complicate the implementation.
It is possible that the function could be run concurrently with the thread that calls async(),
and then,
in that case, we have to start thinking about possible conflicts.
It is also possible that wait() or get() could be called on the future in a different thread.
There is nothing to prevent that.
And in that case, we have to consider potential conflicts with that thread.
On the other hand, if it does not launch a new thread, then it is possible that the function might not
be called at all if there is some path through the code where wait() or get() or some similar function is not called.
And remember, when the execution is deferred, the function is only called after wait() or get() is called.
If we want to use thread-local storage, we have a big problem because we do not know which thread's local storage
is going to be used.
So what are we to do?
My recommendation is to always be explicit.
Always provide a launch option so everyone can understand
what is happening.
The situations where you would use the async launch option:
If the thread has to run in a separate thread
because launch_async will force it it.
If the task function is going to use thread-local storage.
Because in that case, you will know that it has thread-local storage which is unique to that task.
It is not shared with any other executing code.
If the task function must be executed, even if you are not going to call get() or wait().
And finally, the other situation is, if you pass the future on to a different thread and that thread
is going to call wait_for() or wait_until().
The situations in which you would use the deferred launch option:
If you want to make sure that the task
is run in the thread which calls get() or wait().
If none of these conditions apply, then it is safe to use the default.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!